What'd I miss?
There was this big flash,
some fire shot out,
and now he's
just coming to.
What?! I was only gone
for a second!
Shh! I want to see this.
Oh, for God's sake, Hal!
Pay the money
and get a repairman.
I am not wasting good money
when I am perfectly capable...
[shrieking]
♪ Yes, no, maybe ♪
♪ I don't know ♪
♪ Can you repeat the question? ♪
♪ You're not the boss
of me now ♪
♪ You're not
the boss of me now ♪
♪ You're not the boss
of me now ♪
♪ And you're not so big... ♪
♪ You're not the boss
of me now ♪
♪ You're not
the boss of me now ♪
♪ You're not the boss
of me now ♪
♪ And you're not so big ♪
♪ ...Life is unfair. ♪
Scholarships,
financial aid cover $26,000.
Plus the Fleish Grant,
the Hanelin Fellowship,
the $220 scratcher
your dad won.
I got accepted
into Harvard.
We don't know how
we're going to pay for it,
but we've got
to find a way.
It's my dream school.
It's 2,000 miles away
from Mom.
The Cook Grant...
we're still $5,000 short.
What?! Those thieving
Harvard bastards!
Well, well, well,
Mr. Knows How to Multiply
is freaking out about his future
while I am set for life.
Reese, don't you think
it's even a little bit sad
to become a janitor
at your own high school?
Assistant janitor;
all mop and no paperwork.
Okay, I've packed all your
winter clothes,
your comic books
and half your knickknacks.
Guess what. We have the same
Quiet Riot CD,
roomie.
Stop calling me that.
I'm not your roommate
for another two weeks.
12 days!
The second you graduate,
you are out
of this house and into his.
What other jobs
can you get?
I've already got three shifts
in the cafeteria,
Monday and Wednesday
at the bookstore
and mopping the dorms at night.
I don't know, I guess I could
chop vegetables during chem lab.
This is outrageous!
Kids with half your brains
are getting full rides!
They didn't correct
their interviewer
on his pronunciation
of "Sarte."
-Sartre.
-I don't care.
We will find
the money somehow.
This is as good a time
as any to talk about it.
I do have a private life.
I'll keep it confined
to my own room,
but you should probably
know my safe word.
It's weird to
think about.
Pretty soon you guys
will be gone.
Yeah.
And this...
just sitting around
hanging out...
We're not going to have
many more of these.
[chuckles]:
No, we sure won't.
Seems like
only yesterday
you and I were going
to homecoming,
putting the school
paper to bed
fretting over our first
big date
with Sharon Hines.
Mm, that kiss
went on forever.
Uh, Mr. Kenarban,
Stevie's supposed to help me
work on my speech.
Right, right.
Mr. Valedictorian.
Congratulations again.
I'm glad my son
can help you out
with your big,
important speech.
It's probably that selflessness
that got him the second spot.
Dad!
I'm not insulting
salutatorian.
It's quite an honor.
I'm just glad that even
after I got Cedric Hampton
to be the school's
commencement speaker,
they still had
the integrity to make you
valedictorian
and not my crippled son.
Go!
I wonder if moving out and being
on my own is going to change me?
Do you think I'll get
a British accent?
Absolutely.
Hey, wait.
-You know what us
moving out means.
-What?
We can get rid
of the nuclear option.
-Oh, my God.
-You're right.
What's the... nuclear option?
Evidence of the worst thing
we ever did.
MALCOLM:
This is what made sure
that no matter how bad we
screwed each other over,
there was always a limit.
None of us could
push anyone
to a point where they
had nothing to lose.
Or they'd just pull the trigger
and destroy all of us.
How bad... can it be?
One time we made Mom think
she had cancer.
But we had a really good reason.
Stop saying it'll
be all right!
You'll never be able
to raise them alone!
Um... Mom, I know
this is a bad time,
but can you sign these
report cards?
[sobbing]
[Hal sobbing]
It's not like
we're proud of it.
I mean, we were
proud of it,
but we're not
proud of it now.
The point is,
we can get rid of it.
Dewey, I think
you should do this.
Really?
Me?
You're going to be the oldest
around here soon.
It'll be good
for your maturity.
This is your show.
Make us proud.
I always pictured
this day coming,
except both of you
were dead.
What the heck,
it still feels great.
I am begging you.
I just need $5,000.
You think I would be calling
you if I wasn't desperate?
Look, I know how much
you hate me.
But, no kidding,
I'm at rock bottom.
I've got no money,
no prospects
and nowhere else to turn.
Well... can I speak
to a seniorloan officer?
So, 3:15 you make the last
round of the bathrooms.
Toilet 12 is a bit
of a diva.
Then you rinse your mop
in hot water
and disinfectant, and you
hang it on a yellow peg.
Any questions?
Yeah. Why would you
ever go home?
This job is better
than I could ever imagine.
A cool uniform, the power
to cordon off wet floors.
You're not just some
creepy loner
hanging around the school,
you're the janitor.
Don't get too
excited, kid.
You'll be gone
after 30 days.
Oh, no, I am really
committed to this.
No, no, no,
you don't understand.
This is a union gig.
Once you get past
the 30-day probation,
you're locked for life.
Full benefits, medical,
everything.
So they never
keep a new guy
for more than a month.
Hey, I'm sorry, kid.
You really seem to be
a natural at this.
I've never seen
anybody
take to garbage
the way you do.
There's got to be some way.
I mean... I mean, what
if there was a mess--
a mess that was so big
and sticky and disgusting
that it was impossible to clean
up in less than 30 days?
It's a beautiful thought, kid.
But there's no such thing
as a 30-day mess.
Yeah?
Well, they also said
they'd never put a man on Mars.
Sorry we're late.
You wouldn't believe the fight
we got in over shower curtains.
Those dolphins were gay.
You think all dolphins are gay.
All dolphins aregay.
Dolphins can
kill sharks.
Gay guys can kill sharks,
and they're still gay.
Can we begin?
With this fire, a terrible
secret that bound us together
is gone forever.
Jamie will grow up
in a world
without the fear that haunted
every second of our lives.
He'll learn to give
birthday presents
out of love, not blackmail,
and to share out of
the generosity of his heart,
not the dread
in the pit of his stomach.
With this fire,
a curse is lifted
and a brilliant
new dawn is born.
ALL: Amen.
[loud crackling]
Nice touch.
You know, if you want me
to take a look
at your valedictory speech,
I'd be happy to.
Mom, stop it.
-I don't want anyone
to see it until it's ready.
-Fine.
But if you ever want
some fresh ears...
No, I'm really
happy with it.
Just let me do this.
Okay, okay.
But why are you quoting a rap
group when there are people
like Paul McCartney out there
who are just as relevant
and don't go around showing off
the tops of their underpants?
[coughing and gagging]
It's a start.
Susan, I'm sorry.
Mom just bullied me
into giving her
our last ticket for graduation.
Because the last time
I stood up to her
someone dumped a pig's head
down our chimney.
Besides, she's already
on her way.
She's driving down
with Francis and Piama.
[pounding on door]
Lois, I really think he's
going to do it this time!
You've got to stop him!
There you are.
I drove by 80 miles
of blunt objects
just to get to you.
I hope you run!
You better make that first swing
count, Princess.
Hi, Mom.
Finish your cigarette
and I'll make you some lunch.
Come on, you can help me
make your beds.
You had to make
a speech first, didn't you?
-Hal...
-Right.
Son, don't feel bad.
In some parallel universe,
you did it.
Oh, no.
They canceled
my Pierson Grant.
That was $3,000!
They're using the money
to do a study
on what happens to kids
who can't afford college.
They're offering me $50
to be a part of it.
Show it to me.
It's beautiful, Grandma.
I just cracked the lid
a quarter inch
and it burned off
all the hair in my nose.
-Good. Who takes the fall?
-Huh?
Your patsy...
who is your patsy?
It's a good thing
you called me.
If you're going to make
this big mess,
they're going
to blame someone.
And you can make it
anyone you want.
A teacher, a neighbor.
If you're lucky,
a whole family goes down.
And you get
to sell their dog.
-You are amazing.
-Well...
If you ever brushed your teeth,
I would kiss you.
You want $8,000.
Yes.
All right, the way this works is
you come back next week...
That won't be necessary.
I'm not going
to pay you back.
Hear me out.
There's no way I can get
the money to pay you, but
instead of making
you go through
that whole, stupid charade
where you keep calling me
and I keep making lame excuses
until you hunt me down,
I am willing to go straight
to the leg-breaking.
Really?
Yes. Whenever you say,
I just show up and you start
snapping bones.
Arms, legs, whatever.
Invite anyone you want.
I promise, I will scream
and cry and beg for mercy,
and make it so loud
and so horrible
that no one who sees it
will ever
miss another payment again.
Now, you can't buy
that kind of publicity.
Couldn't I just
not give you the money
and still break
your arms and legs?
Wouldn't that accomplish
the same thing?
True. But... then I think your
point starts to get muddled.
Maybe we should sleep on it.
Will you straighten up
those magazines?
The Kenarbans will
be here any minute
and I don't want
their fancy friend
to think he's
visiting a hobo camp.
Yeah, Mom,
let's all jump through hoops
so the big corporate fat cat
doesn't have
to see anything real.
You know, Francis,
it wouldn't hurt you
to jump through a hoop or two.
Are you even
still looking for a job?
As a matter
of fact...
As a matter of fact,
I don't have to.
I got a lot of irons
in the fire right now.
I got three different ideas
for children's books,
and I'm considering applying
for a bounty hunter's license.
Are you insane?!
In what world is that
even remotel...?
Piama, will you help me
get the good china?
out of the closet?
I love finally having
an excuse to use these.
I took them out once
when that congressman
was going door to door,
but he just
clogged up
our toilet and left.
By the way, Mom,
I think it's high time
we cleared the air
about that day
you threw away my Harlem
Globetrotters autographs.
Harlem who? What are
you talking about?
I'm not saying there
was definitely some unconscious
racism going on, but I do
think someone could benefit
from a little self-examination
in a quiet moment.
Dewey, can I see you
in your room for a second?
[doorbell rings]
Hi! How are you...
Okay, it's pretty obvious
I just saved your ass.
Now I want to know why.
So right when we walk
in, I fake a seizure.
When I fall, I make sure my
skirt comes up over my hips.
I'm going commando, so
you'll have plenty of time
to sneak this
out of the car.
I love you, Grandma.
You're a good boy.
Are you kidding me? That whole
cancer scare was fake?!
I played cards with her
in the hospital for no reason?
Why didn't you
just get rid of this?
I don't know.
I couldn't. The thought
of destroying it
just made me... sad.
I get it, Dewey.
You love your brothers.
You didn't have much
to keep you together,
but you had this.
And now I have this.
Something really horrible
to blackmail you guys with
that I'm totally clean on.
-Mom's friend Jenny.
-We're good.
So Mr. Hampton,
you got all the
subroutines, the GUI,
all of that into 16K?
I can't get a Boolean
sort in that.
You youngsters are spoiled
by all that cheap RAM.
When I started out,
I had an 8-bit bus
that ran at 4.7 megahertz,
and I was happy to have it.
This is fantastic.
I haven't understood
a word you've said
for the last ten minutes.
Oh, you don't have
to be that impressed.
Sure, now he owns
a GulfStream jet
and a baseball team,
but there was a time
when this guy's name
was Accident Pants.
Remember that?
I remember somebody
begging me for a loan.
Remember that?
Now, listen, I'm really
not here to socialize.
I've seen some
of the programming
you boys have done.
The server-to-server
algorithm.
The evolution simulator--
that's all good stuff.
He thinks...
we're geniuses.
Well, good enough for a two-year
contract, anyway.
Full benefits, stock options.
We're talking
six figures-- each.
Oh, my God!
Wait, how many is six?
I'm not being charitable.
I'm locking you in
while you're still cheap,
but I need an answer right now.
Otherwise it's not
worth it to me.
-Well, I...
-That's a very generous offer,
-Mr. Hampton, but no.
-Mom, what are you...?
Malcolm's going to college, he's
going to finish his education.
-But thank you very much.
-He wasn't asking you, he was...
Ma'am, I completely
understand. I should have
talked to you first.
Consider the offer withdrawn.
Sorry, kid. 24/7 job.
You'd need your whole family
behind you.
And don't be mad at your mom.
She's only trying
to look out for you.
Who knows how far I would've
gone if I went to college?
[gurgling]
What's that noise?
Nothing, Dad.
Just a little hungry.
[gurgling]
All right, Malcolm,
I know you're angry.
You might as well say
what you have to now
and get it out
of your system.
[loud sloshing]
I'm so sorry, Jamie.
I didn't know I had you
hanging upside down
until that last layer
of gunk came off.
Well, we might as well
go ahead and have kids.
I'm not afraid of changing
diapers anymore.
Good job, Reese.
Hey, I am the victim here!
Those are my
hopes and dreams
you're scrubbing
out of your cracks!
Anybody else hungry?
MALCOLM:
You know what?
I'm glad!
This is appropriate.
Now my life looks
exactly how I feel.
How could you
screw me over like that?
Because you were
going to take that job,
and we are not going to let you
throw your life away.
How is being rich
throwing my life away?!
Because it's not the life
you're supposed to have!
The life you're supposed
to have is you go to Harvard
and you earn every fellowship
and internship they have.
You graduate first
in your class,
and you start working
in public service--
either district attorney
or running some foundation--
and then you become governor
of a mid-sized state
and then you
become president.
What?!
Of the United States.
Dad?
I'm sorry, son. It's true.
I thought you knew.
Our expectations
started out
much smaller, but you
just kept upping the ante.
What if I don't
-want to be president?
-It's too late
for that.
You're gonna do it.
Oh, really?
Have you decided my position
on capital-gains tax cuts?
What are my foreign
policy objectives?!
That doesn't matter.
What does matter
is you'll be
the only person
in that position
who will ever give a crap
about people like us.
We've been getting
the short end of the stick
for thousands of years,
and I, for one, am sick of it.
Now, you are going
to be president, mister,
and that's the end of it.
Did it ever occur to you
that I could have taken this
job, gotten really rich
and then bought my way
into being president?
Of course it did.
We decided against it.
-What?!
-Because then you wouldn't
be a good president.
You wouldn't
have suffered enough.
I have been suffering
all my life.
I'm sorry.
It's not enough.
You know what
it's like
to be poor,
and you know
what it's like
to work hard.
Now you're going
to learn what it's like
to sweep floors
and bust your ass
and accomplish twice as much
as all the kids around you.
And it won't mean anything
because they will still
look down on you.
And you will want so much
for them to like you,
and they just won't.
And it'll break your heart,
and that'll make your heart
bigger and open your eyes
and finally you will realize
that there's more
to life than proving
you're the smartest
person in the world.
I'm sorry, Malcolm, but you
don't get the easy path.
You don't get to just have fun
and be rich and live
the life of luxury.
That's Dewey.
Really?
This is unbelievable.
You actually expect
me to be president.
No, no, I'm sorry.
You expect me to be one
of the greatest presidents
in the history of
the United States.
You look me in the eye
and you tell me you can't do it.
And as the Dalai Lama so
eloquently stated last summer
on my yacht,
"Wisdom is the light by day,
virtue is the protection
by night."
And as we go down
the path of life,
there's often confusion and fear
because we fail to remember
that we have
this wisdom within us.
It's there to call on
to get us through
the dark night of the soul,
to help us achieve...
AmeriSys Industries?
What's that?
Shh!
It's my employee badge.
Please don't tell Mom.
It'd make her too happy.
She'd never let me
live it down.
You got a job?
For the last two months.
It's at this
giant corporation.
I'm in this tiny
little cubicle,
surrounded by hundreds of
other tiny little cubicles,
inputting numbers
into a computer all day.
And I love it.
I love everything
about it.
I love the stability and
the regular paychecks.
I love my parking space.
I love getting those
stupid joke e-mails.
Oh, did you get the one
about the two Irish guys?
That's classic!
And now, with his
valedictory speech,
please welcome Malcolm...
[microphone feedback]
Like all of you,
I'm praying for this speech
to be over soon.
Most of us have been dreaming
of this day for years,
the day we leave childhood
and achieve independence.
But even if we move
thousands of miles away,
there's no escape.
Our families are
coming with us.
They'll be with us forever--
in our habits, our gestures,
and in the choices we make,
so we'll never be set free.
But we'll never be alone.
As Paul McCartney once said...
LOIS: Oh, my God!
What kind of a monster would
do something like this?
Oh, Hal, for God's sake,
don't touch it!
Man, if Mom
ever found out
it was the two of us...
Hey.
The five-settings heating pad!
You listen to me.
You really do!
[oven timer dings]
Someone's cake is ready.
Mom, you can yell and scream
all you want.
It's not going to change me!
I will look for a job when
I am damn good and ready!
You just can't stand
that your son
is still a free spirit!
Chicken casserole
for dinner?
Mmm. Home at 5:00.
This is so nice.
Reese is gone.
Malcolm's off to Harvard.
I don't know how you
did it, but everything
worked out exactly as planned.
What's wrong?
[shrieking]
And when they found the
peepholes in the bathroom
they fired Al
and brought me on full time.
Grandma's right:
it's good to have a patsy.
So how's it going with you,
Mr. Ivy League Big Shot?
It's great.
It's a whole new world.
Listen, I've got to get
to my Calc class.
I'll talk to you later.
♪ I've seen better days ♪
♪ I've been the star
of many plays ♪
♪ I've seen better days... ♪
Captioned by Post Haste Digital